Hi, welcome back.
In this video we're talking about dealing with errors.
One of Python's core tenets is ask for forgiveness
not for permission.
Now, I know how well this works with friends and family,
not so well,
but it works fantastically in Python.
Let's have a look at this piece of code here.
We've got our car class and our garage class.
And previously we looked at how we can check that,
we make sure that the car is an instance of type car.
But let's imagine that we did not do that.
And instead we did something that's pretty normal
for the majority of programming languages
which is to just, you know, when you add a car
just add the car.
That's what the method does.
And then we would of course use them like so,
Ford equals a new garage and then Fiesta is a new car.
And then of course Ford dot add car Fiesta.
This is the normal usage for these two classes.
Now normally if we wanted to make sure that we're only
adding car objects to the garage we could,
of course, do this if isinstance car car then do this else
print, like you know, your car was not a car.
Your car was not a car.
Or you could potentially raise an error here.
And I'm sorry this should be Fiesta not car.
This is a pretty typical structure of coding a function
in this case the add car function.
And before you call the function you check whether
that's something you can do.
Can I call this function?
Yes.
Then call it.
And if not say an error happened.
This is really popular structure in a lot of
programming languages where you ask for permission first
and then instead of for forgiveness.
So here you're asking for permission to run the function
with the data you've got.
If you get it because this matches then you add the car.
Otherwise you say your car was not a car.
Python suggests that in many cases our code can be
more readable by asking for forgiveness instead.
So doing something like this instead of that
doing something like this.
Try to call function,
this is not real Python code by the way,
if failed, do something,
say that an error happened.
So you can see this is slightly more concise
because you don't have to check whether the function
is okay to be called or not.
Okay.
So circling back to raising exceptions we can go back
to adding our is instance here.
If not is instance car of car then raise a type error.
And I'm just going to copy this string back from my notes
so I don't bore you typing it.
And so okay, it's the same string as we had before.
So Python suggests that this is better
because now we only have to check whether the car is
appropriate once inside the method
and every where else we can just call it,
we can just do Ford dot add car Fiesta.
Of course an exception might happen,
an error might happen,
by the way error and exception pretty much the same thing.
Okay?
I just I started with Java a long time ago
and they're called exceptions there.
So an exception or an error might happen
when you call this method.
For example, if your car is not a car,
it's a string so what do we do?
Well, we're going to try to run the code.
We're going to try and that's try with a colon,
this must be indented because this is block.
And then we're going to have an except.
So we're going to try to run this block of code
and if anything happens,
an error happens,
an error gets raised by something inside this code
such as a type error we're going to say
print your car was not a car.
Okay.
Now what's going to happen is, again,
we're going to try to run this code
and then we're going to except and the only error
we're going to catch so if a type error happens
we're going to print this out.
If a different type of error happens
like a value error that will not be caught.
Let's see what happens when we run app dot P Y.
Remember, make sure to right click app dot P Y and run it.
Now we get nothing
because of course the car was a car object.
Let's try adding a a Fiesta here and run it again.
Now we get this message saying your car was not a car.
Cool?
What happens if instead of a type error here
we raise a value error?
Not the right error to raise, it should be a type error,
but just for example, now we get this trace back.
And that's because the only thing we caught
was a type error in our except.
What happens when that happens is that the error
stops being raised up to the next level continuously
and instead it just dies here.
And we get access to doing something
when that error happens.
It's really good to catch the errors on your user interface.
In this case this is our user interface, sort of.
It doesn't have much of an interface but
so that you should catch them so that users
don't ever see this.
You don't want your users to see errors.
However,
you should not necessarily catch them when you are
working on the code that users are not going to
interact with directly.
That way if an error does happen anywhere in your code
your program's going to crash
and that's good while you're writing code.
Once you share the programme with your users
you don't want errors to be appearing.
So you want to catch them like so.
Okay.
So there are two benefits,
one is that I think our code reads more nicely
we're going to do this,
oh, okay if an error happened we'll do accent.
We don't have to check whether we can run something
and the second thing is that our check is now here.
So for example if we wanted to add to cars before,
we would have to to have this if twice
before we add each car.
Now the if is in the add car function
and our code only needs this single line.
So again the syntax is this try except syntax.
We try to rework whatever it is in try block and
if an error happens we jump to the except block.
And we do so only for errors that match the one
in the block a type error.
We can catch multiple errors by just adding
another except block.
Like so.
Now, if there is a type error this would run
and if there is a value error that would run.
This is particularly useful when you have multiple
types of errors that could potentially be raised.
Of course here it's unlikely that that's going to happen.
Over the next few sections we're going to make use
of this try except syntax a lot.
So just something to keep in mind as we move forward.
Try and except also have a final counterpart
which is called finally.
The finally block runs every time.
So you're going to try to run this code here
if an error happens then you're going to run
whatever code is in the appropriate block for the error
and at the end you're always going to run
the finally block whether or not an error happened.
So here you could, for example,
print the garage now has len Ford cars.
For example.
So again except blocks may or may not run.
Finally always runs.
So again if we run this now
we get something weird happened
because we raised the value error up here
and then we print out the garage has now zero cars.
Notice how we don't see a stack trace because
the error has been silenced by the fact that we caught it.
So in the next video we're going to look at
how we can not silence it.
And that can also be quite useful
especially when you're developing.
See you on the next video.